could  be a good  fit if:
•want  to get an idea  of people’s  attitudes  and  opinions
•want  to run a test  pilot  for survey
•want  to generate  hypotheses  that  can  be tested  in greater  depth  in future  research
Be aware of research bias, such as selection bias and sampling bias.
Purposive Sampling 
83 CDS 533Purposive  sample,  also  known  as judgement  sampling,  involves  the researcher  using  
their  expertise  to select  a sample  that  is most  useful  to the purposes  of the research .
•wants  to gain  detailed  knowledge  about  a specific  phenomenon  rather  than  make  
statistical  inferences,  or where  the population  is very  small  and  specific .
•Make  sure  to describe  inclusion  and  exclusion  criteria  and  beware  of observer  bias  
affecting  arguments . 
Purposive Sampling 
84 CDS 533
Purposive sampling isbest used when want tofocus indepth onrelatively small samples .Perhaps
would like toaccess aparticular subset ofthe population that shares certain characteristics  when
you have alotofbackground information about the topic .Itisathigh risk forresearch biases like
observer bias .
Snowball Sampling 
85 CDS 533Snowball  sampling  is a sampling  method  where  new  units  are recruited  by other  units  
to form  part  of the sample . 
•useful  way  to conduct  research  about  people  with  specific  traits  who  might  
otherwise  be difficult  to identify  (e.g., people  with  a rare  disease)
• downside  here  is representativeness  due  to the reliance  on participants  recruiting  
others,  which  leads  to sampling  bias .
Snowball Sampling 
86 CDS 533•widely  employed  method  in qualitative  research,  specifically  when  studying  hard -to-reach  
populations . These  may  include :
•Populations  that  are small  relative  to the general  population
•Geographically  dispersed  populations
•Populations  possessing  a social  stigma  or particular  shared  points  of interest
•used  to study  sensitive  topics,  or topics  that  people  may  prefer  not to discuss  publicly
Quota Sampling 
87 CDS 533Quota  sampling  is a sampling  method  that  relies  on the non -random  selection  of a 
predetermined  number  or proportion  of units . 
•It first  divide  the population  into  mutually  exclusive  subgroups  (called  strata)  and  
then  recruit  sample  units  until  you  reach  the quota . 
•The  aim  of quota  sampling  is to control  what  or who  makes  up the sample .
•To gain  insight  about  a characteristic  of a particular  subgroup  or investigate  
relationships  between  different  subgroups .
Quota Sampling 
88 CDS 533•It is most  commonly  used  in research  studies  where  there  is no sampling  frame  available,  
since  it can  help  researchers  obtain  a sample  that  is as representative  (a broad  picture)  as 
possible  of the population  being  studied .
•It cannot  be generalized  to the wider  population  and  is at high  risk  for bias .
Differences
89 CDS 533Difference between non -probability sampling and probability sampling:
Sampling Methods to use
90 CDS 533For any  research,  it is essential  to choose  a sampling  method  accurately  to meet  the goals  of the 
study . The  effectiveness  of sampling  relies  on various  factors . Here  are some  steps  expert  
researchers  follow  to decide  the best  sampling  method .
•Jot down  the research  goals . Generally,  it must  be a combination  of cost,  precision,  or 
accuracy .
•Identify  the effective  sampling  techniques  that  might  potentially  achieve  the research  goals .
•Test  each  of these  methods  and  examine  whether  they  help  achieve  the goal  and  select  the 
method  that  works  best  for the research .
• Many  statistical  methods  assume  random  sampling ; however,  it is often  impractical  to obtain  
random  samples .
• Inferences  to populations  from  nonrandom  samples  can  be justified,  but this  depends  on 
background  information  sufficient  to determine  that  a sample  is representative .
• Biases  in sampling  procedures  can  mislead .
• Conclusions  from  a study  should  be consistent  with  how  the data  was  sampled .Sampling Example
91 CDS 533
Let’stake aninteresting case study and apply these steps toperform sampling .Recently
conducted General Elections inIndia afew months back .The public opinion polls every news
channel was running atthe time :
Were these results concluded by considering the views of all 900 million voters of 
the country or a fraction of these voters?Sampling Example
92 CDS 533
Step 1
The first stage inthe sampling process istoclearly define the target population .
So, tocarry out opinion polls, polling agencies consider only the people who are above 18
years ofage and are eligible tovote inthe population .
Step 2
Sampling Frame–Itisalist ofitems orpeople forming apopulation from which the sample is
taken .
So, the sampling frame would bethe list ofallthe people whose names appear onthe voter
listofaconstitu