CDS 533
Statistics for Data Science
Instructor: Lisha Yu
Division of Artificial Intelligence 
School of Data Science
Lingnan University
Fall 2024
2 CDS 2001Data: The Heart of Statistics3 CDS 2001Big Picture of Statistics
DataWhat is Data?
4 CDS 533Look around you, there is data everywhere.
Data refers to facts and statistics collected together for reference or analysis.
(Not limit to)Sources of Data
5 CDS 533Depending on the objective of the data collection, the source of data is said to be
•Primary data
•Information collected directly from source
•Data collected for very 1sttime
•Data is original and specific to your researchSources of Data
6 CDS 533Depending on the objective of the data collection, the source of data is said to be
•Secondary data
•Data collected by someone else (Often the primary data)
•Data collected in the past
•Data is NOT original or 1sthand dataSources of Data
7 CDS 533Questions:
A marketing agency utilizes sales reports and customer feedback from a retail 
store to analyze market trends for a new product launch.
A research team conducts surveys and interviews with patients to gather 
information about the effectiveness of a new drug.Sources of Data
8 CDS 533Questions:
Amarketing agency utilizes sales reports and customer feedback from aretail
store toanalyze market trends foranew product launch .
A research  team  conducts  surveys  and  interviews  with  patients  to gather  
information  about  the effectiveness  of a new  drug .ANSWER: Secondary data
ANSWER: Primary dataCategories of Data
9 CDS 533
Statistical  way…Categories of Data
10 CDS 533Nominal Data
This type of data is qualitative in nature which has 
no inherent mathematical significance . It is sort 
of a fixed value under which a unit of observation 
is assigned or “categorized ”.Qualitative data 
represents groupings
Categories of Data
11 CDS 533Ordinal Data
This type of data is the combination of numerical 
and categorical data ,i.e. categorical data having 
some mathematical significance.Qualitative data 
represents groupings
Categories of Data
12 CDS 533Qualitative data 
represents groupings
Categories of Data
13 CDS 533Discrete Data
Discrete data is the information that often counts 
of some event ,i.e. can only take specific values. 
These are often integer -based , but not necessarily.
eg:
•Number of times a coin was flipped
•Shoe sizes of peopleQuantitative data 
represents amounts
Categories of Data
14 CDS 533Continuous Data
Continuous Data is the information that has the 
possibility of having infinite values ,i.e. can take 
any value within a range.
eg:
•How many centimeters of rain fell on a given day
•Distance, volumeQuantitative data 
represents amounts
Categories of Data
15 CDS 533Quantitative data 
represents amounts
Level of Measurement
18 CDS 533When  we conducting  statistical  analysis…
Data  is often  represented  in a rectangular  array  where  each  column  is a variable  
and  each  row  is an observational  unit  or sampling  unit .
It is important, as it determines the type of statistical analysis you can carry out.Level of Measurement
19 CDS 533•Nominal  variables  are used  to 
“name”  a series  of values . 
•Ordinal  scales  provide  good  
information  about  the order  of 
choices . 
•Interval  scales  give  us the 
order  of values  + the ability  to 
quantify  the difference  between  
each  one . 
•Ratio  scales  give  us the 
ultimate–order,  interval  values,  
plus  the ability  to calculate  
ratios  since  a “true  zero”  can  be 
defined .
Level of Measurement
20 CDS 533
Level of Measurement
21 CDS 533
Level of Measurement
22 CDS 533
Level of Measurement
23 CDS 533
Data Collection Method
24 CDS 533There are many methods to collect data:
•Census
•Sample survey
•Administrative data
•Crowdsourcing
•Web scraping
•Remote sensing
•Statistical registers
•Open data
•Big dataType of Data
25 CDS 533Passive  data
e.g., web  browsing  history,  sensor  data,  GPS,  ect.
Active  data
e.g., survey  response,  social  media  post,  form  submissions,  ect.Data can be passive and active.Data Quality
26 CDS 533Generally  speaking,  statistical  data  is evaluated  in terms  of its “fitness  for use” 
- that  is, the extent  to which  the statistical  information  can  be relied  upon  to 
fulfill  the information  needs .
Quality  dimensions :
•Relevance  (e.g., relate  to question  or data  gap)
•Accessibility  (e.g, easy  to access  or affordable)
•Accuracy  (e.g., cover  the required  population  and  period  of reference)
•Timeliness  (e.g., willing  to accept  lower  accuracy  to get the data  faster)
•Interpretability  (e.g., useful,  reliable,  complete)
•Coherence  (e.g., information  consistent  over  time)27 CDS 2001Big Picture of Statistics
Study DesignData Gathering
28 CDS 533To begin,  the following  questions  should  be addressed :
•Why  is this  being  conducted?
•Whom  will the collected  information  be about?
•What  do I need  to know?
•How  will the information  be used?
•How 