 the same  person  3 times  on an electronic  balance  and  obtain  slightly  
different  measurements  – 67.5 kg, 67.4 kg and  67.6 kg
Variability  may  be due  to operator,  instrument  and  subject
Minimize  random  error  and  improve  precision
•Operating  manuals,  training  the operator,  refining  / automating  instruments
•Repeat  the measurement  and  average  over  a larger  number  of observations  (but!  
added  cost,  practical  difficulties)Measurements: precision versus accuracy
46 CDS 533Accuracy  of a variable  (Bias) : the degree  to which  a variable  actually  represents       
what  it is supposed  to represent . It is a function  of systematic  error  (bias)  which  is often  
difficult  to detect  and  has  important  influence  on the validity  of the result . [Center ]
Example : incorrect  calibration  of an instrument
Improve  accuracy  and  minimize  bias
•Operating  manuals,  training  the operator,  refining  / automating  instruments
•Periodic  calibration  using  a gold  standard  
•Blinding : double–blind  study : the experimental  subject  and  the evaluator  have  no 
information  on which  treatment  that  they  receive  or give , any  inaccuracy  in 
measuring  the outcome  will be the same  in the 2 groupsMeasurements: precision versus accuracy
47 CDS 533Bias  and  variance  in shooting  arrows  at a target . Bias  means  that  the archer  
systematically  misses  in the same  direction . Variance  means  that  the arrows  
are scattered .
•Tradeoff48 CDS 533Review – Type of Data
    – Study Design
www.kahoot.it49 CDS 2001Big Picture of Statistics
SamplingSampling 
50 CDS 533Scenario : The  university  wants  to assess  student  satisfaction  with  campus  
facilities . 
How will you collect the data?
Sampling 
51 CDS 533Sampling  process  of selecting  a small  number  of elements  (samples)  from  
a larger  defined  target  group  of elements  (Population)  such  the information  
gathered  from  the samples  will allow  judgments  to the population .Sampling 
52 CDS 533Scenario : The  university  wants  to assess  student  satisfaction  with  campus  
facilities .
How will you collect the data?
Poor Data Collection Method:
The university decides to distribute an online survey only to students who 
frequently visit the campus coffee shop. 
Sampling 
53 CDS 533If sample  data  are not collected  in an appropriate  way,  the data  may  be so 
completely  useless  that  no amount  of statistical  tutoring  can  salvage  them .
Method used to collect sample data influences the quality of the staitstical 
analysis.
What other data collection problems can you think of?Sampling Distortion
54 CDS 533•Sampling  Error
•Sampling  BiasSampling Error
55 CDS 533Sampling  error  is the error  caused  by observing  a sample  instead  of the whole  
population . 
•difference  between  ҧ𝑥 and  𝜇
•inevitable  gap
Sampling Error
56 CDS 533Non -sampling  error  refers  to all sources  of error  that  are unrelated  to sampling .   
•when  there  are problems  with  the sampling  method,  or the way  the survey  
is designed  or carried  out.
(part)Sampling Bias
58 CDS 533Sampling  bias  is a bias  in which  a sample  is collected  in such  a way  that  
some  members  of the intended  population  have  a lower  sampling  
probability  than  others .
59 CDS 533A health  organization  wants  to study  the dietary  habits  of teenagers . They  
decide  to survey  students  at a local  high  school  known  for its strong  
athletic  program .
What  types  of sampling  distortion  are present  in this  scenario,  and  how  
might  it influence  the conclusions  about  the dietary  habits  of all teenagers?
•Sampling  Bias
•The  dietary  habits  reported  may  reflect  the nutritional  needs  and  preferences  of 
athletes  rather  than  those  of all teenagers,  that  could  lead  to misguided  policy  
recommendations  or health  initiatives  aimed  at the broader  teenage  population .Discussion
60 CDS 533A researcher  is studying  the average  test  scores  of high  school  students  in 
a district . They  randomly  select  30 students  from  one  school,  which  
happens  to have  a particularly  high -performing  academic  reputation .
What  sampling  sampling  distortion  could  occur  in this  scenario,  and  how  
might  it impact  the estimation  of the average  test  scores  for all high  school  
students  in the district?
•Sampling  Error
•The  average  test  score  calculated  may  not accurately  reflect  the performance  
of all high  school  students  in the district,  may  potentially  influencing  funding  
and  resource  allocation  decisions .Discussion
Characterics of Good Sample 
61 CDS 533•Representativeness
•Accessible
•Cost  effective
•Of the right  size
•Generalizability  (lack  of bias)
•Obtained  with  minimum  sampling  error
•It shoud  be suitable  for anlysis  as per the study  design  
63 CDS 533How can we select representative samples?
Sampling Method
64 CDS 5