 accurate  and  timely  does  the information  have  to be?29 CDS 533Data is everywhere ...  
What is your research question
Formulate a relevant  research  question30 CDS 2001The Role of Statistics
•Design : Planning  and  carring  out research  study
•Description : Summarizing  and  exploring  data
•Inference : Making  predictions  and  generalizationStudy Design
31 CDS 533Instatistical studies, the type ofstudy design used and the details ofthe
design are important indetermining what kind ofconclusions we may
draw from the results .
Study Design
32 CDS 533Instatistical studies, the type ofstudy design used and the details ofthe
design are important indetermining what kind ofconclusions we may
draw from the results .
Sample Surveys
33 CDS 533Sample  surveys  are a special  type  of data  collection  that  usually  aim  to 
discover  the opinions  of people  on certain  topics .
In a sample  survey,  a sample  of individuals  is selected  from  a larger  
population  of individuals .  
The  idea  of sampling  is to study  a small  part  of the population  in order  to gain  
information  about  the population  as a whole .  
Conclusions  drawn  from  a sample  are valid  only  when  the sample  is drawn  in 
a well -defined  way .Survey Design
34 CDS 533To design  a survey,  many  decisions  have  to be made  about  the following  
issues .
•Survey  objectives
•Target  population
•Data  requirements
•Type  of collection
•Minimizing  error
•Sample  size
•Analysis  plan
•Questionnaire  design
•Data  collection  methods
•Data  processing  plan
•Quality  control
•Analysis  and  dissemination  of results
Survey Bias
35 CDS 533Bias  is defined  as a “deviation  of results  or inferences  from  the truth,  or processes  
leading  to such  a deviation”  and  it occurs  in every  survey .
•Selection : How  was  the survey  sample  selected?  How  many  participants  
completed  the survey?  Was  the sample  broad  enough  to capture  the most  
valuable  insights?
•Response : How  are participants  swayed  by leading  factors  from  the interviewer?  
Such  as the questions  asked,  their  format,  and  the respondent’s  desires  to be 
socially  accepted?
•Interviewer : Is the interviewer  unconsciously  sending  signals  to participants  that  
could  alter  their  answers?  Are the interviewers  biased?  Are the survey  questions  
tailored  towards  specific  outcomes?Survey Example
36 CDS 533Doctor  of Artificial  Intelligence
https ://forms .office .com/Pages/ResponsePage .aspx?id=nReQ_geCskyINAzif
uAWLbxijFLlNFFOrsXVJM 7sZEBUNFZEM 0JHVVRXRUxOQ 0VRQ 0ZHNldPUUQ
4MS4uStudy Design
37 CDS 533Instatistical studies, the type ofstudy design used and the details ofthe
design are important indetermining what kind ofconclusions we may
draw from the results .
Study Design
38 CDS 533Statistical  methods  are driven  by te data  that  we collect . We typically  
obtain  data  from  two  distinct  soures :
•Observational  studies
•observing  and  mesuring  specific  charactertistics  without  
attempting  to modify  the subject  being  studied
•Focus  on the association
Observational Studies
39 CDS 533•Cross  sectional  study
Data  are observed,  measured,  and  collected  at one  point  in time .
•Longitudinal  study
•Retrospective  
•Prospective
Observational Studies (Longitudinal)
40 CDS 533Retrospective  (or case  control)  study
Data  are collected  from  the past  by going  back  in time  (examine  records,  
interviews, ...)
Prospective  (or longitudinal  or cohort)  study
Data  are collected  in the future  form  groups  sharing  common  factors  (call  
cohorts) .
Study Design
41 CDS 533Statistical  methods  are driven  by te data  that  we collect . We typically  
obtain  data  from  two  distinct  soures :
•Experimental  studies
•apply  some  treatment  and  then  observe  its effects  on the 
subjects ; (subjects  in experiments  are called  experimental  units)
•Focus  on cause -and -effect
Experimental Study
42 CDS 533Randomized  controlled  trial  (RCT)
1. Eligible  people  are randomly  assigned  to one  of two  or more  groups . 
2. One  group  receives  the intervention  (such  as a new  drug)  while  the control  group  
receives  nothing  or an inactive  placebo . 
3. The  researchers  then  study  what  happens  to people  in each  group . 
4. Any  difference  in outcomes  can  then  be linked  to the intervention .
Study Design
43 CDS 533
Design  of Experiment
Further readings: https://www.moresteam.com/toolbox/design -of-experimentsBias and Variability
44 CDS 533What would happen if we took many samples?
Population
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
?Measurements: precision versus accuracy
45 CDS 533Precision  of a variable  (Variability) : the degree  to which  a variable  has  nearly  the 
same  value  when  measured  several  times . It is a function  of random  error  (chance)    and  is 
assessed  as the reproducibility  of repeated  measurements . [Spread ]
Example : weigh 